---
layout: post
title:  "'Teaching Problem Solving: You Can and You Should' (Elizabeth Zwicky)"
date:   2006-12-06 11:06:00
---


Mrs.  Zwicky gave a really excellent talk that balanced real research in
education, in problem solving, and in systems administration.  She teaches
systems administration to Navy recruits for a defense contractor, in a tutoring
setting.  The talk addressed the common belief that problem solving skills are
essentially innate and can't be taught.  She discussed the problem-solving
process in general, using lots of examples (well, "war stories") from systems
admin.  Finally, she talked about some of the techniques and skills needed to
teach problem solving (or anything, really).

These techniques included scaffolding -- building the learners' conceptual
understanding by presenting the right tasks, offering the right support, and
convincing the learner to talk about the concepts, not just "what do I type".
Also included was "spotting", which I assume comes from sports -- the idea here
is to make sure that the learner doesn't suffer any horrible consequences from
making mistakes. This topic was interesting to me, as someone who bridges
education, systems administration, and development.  I think it's important for
well-trained, intelligent people to think about and participate in education --
systems administrators included (for the record, I'm happy with the NSF's
requirement that scientists do some sort of "community service" as a part of
their work for a grant).

I found it relevant to me in two ways.  First, the person who replaced me at my
previous job is a very green admin.  He's been doing basic IT legwork for a few
years -- repairing computers, user support, etc.  Now he's in charge of a
heterogenous Linux/Windows shop with a bunch of web services, funky
applications, and so on.  Since he's in a production environment, questions are
always "how do I do XYZ?" rather than "how does SSL work."  That makes it hard
to concentrate on teaching the problem-solving that underlies all of this.

I have also tried to teach varoius IT-related things to a bunch of students
(programming, administration, etc.).  For most, the motivation was missing, and
I never figured out how to get around that.  For one, though, I found that
spotting was an effective way to motivate her to actually try to solve a
problem, rather than just requesting and following steps.  I asked her to add a
printer to a Windows network, but said I wouldn't answer any questions, but
would fix anything that broke while she was working on it.  It took a few
iterations of the assurances before she started, and it took her a while to
work through the process, but she now reflects on this as the best learning
experience of our time working together.

During the Q&A session for this talk, I was somewhat disappointed that all
of the questions focused on Problem Solving / System Administration -- horror
stories, "what kind of problem solving is this", etc. -- nobody was interested
in the teaching of these skills.

