---
layout: post
title:  "Programming Contests and Puzzles"
date:   2007-12-24 23:59:00
---


In August 1992, inCider/A+ magazine ran a programming contest, the rules
 for which were "[U]se the IIGS assembly language source code supplied
by the FTA to complete their Bouncin' Ferno game."  The game was a
marble-madness clone, written entirely in assembly by a bunch of French
hackers.  The code played some fairly devious tricks, as assembly often
does, and was sparsely commented -- and in French, at that.  Anyway, I
spent something like a year rewriting the game from scratch, again in
assembly, and adding a number of new features.  A year later, I won the
contest (admittedly, probably as the only entrant) and rode a wave of
fame and fortune through a few random apple user's groups in central
Maine.

Since then, I've had a fascination with programming contests and related puzzles, even leading me to post a challenge [here in April](http://code.v.igoro.us/archives/8-Programming-Challenge-Sudoku-Generator.html) (which I still haven't solved).

Even though I'm not interested in a new job, I was excited to hear about what came to be known as [the N-BRAIN problem](http://wanted-master-software-developers.com/?key=).
  The first problem, an exercise in test-driven development, was
interesting, although a bit frustrating due to the rather limiting
development environment.  The remaining parts of the problem, however,
were just ridiculously obfuscated, rather than being clever.  I suppose
that means the job wasn't for me, anyway.

I am even more interested to see [Project Euler](http://projecteuler.net/),
 a collection of interesting mathematical and algorithmic problems
ranked by difficulty.  The site may very well wind up on my list of
places to waste time while waiting for compiles (along with Google
Reader and [intrade](http://play.intrade.com/)).

Ah, how I miss the halcyon days of high school, when everyone I knew
spent as much time as I did immersed in code, and when a spat over the
best algorithm for 3d collision detection could leave friends not
speaking for days.  I hate to say it, but I think I was a better hacker
then than I am now.  Perhaps I can interest someone in a head-to-head
challenge?

