---
layout: post
title:  "Git Utilities"
date:   2014-12-24 12:00:00
---

I work with Git and GitHub all the time.
Together, they make lots of things easy, but a few things require more keystrokes and pointy-clicking than I'd like.
So I've built some utilities to help me out.
They're nothing much, but today I took a few spare minutes to put them on (where else?) GitHub so that others may use them, too.

git-ghpull
----------

The first is called [git-ghpull](https://github.com/djmitche/git-ghpull).
This tool makes it easy for a maintainer to merge the commits on a pull request into the upstream repository.
In fact, it is almost identical to the "merge pull reqest" button on the web UI, except that it's not a button in a UI.
More importantly, it only merges the changes locally, so you can perform a last round of validation before pushing back to the upstream repository.

In Buildbot, I use this to merge pull requests that have passed Travis tests and review, but I run the full validation suite locally before pushing.
This helps to catch any bugs introduced by the merge -- it happens!

git-issue2pr
------------

GitHub has a little oddity in its tracking of issues and pull requests.
Let's say you're working on issue #123, and after some discussion in the issue, you finally have a fix ready for a pull request.
If you create a pull request with the web UI, you start a completely new conversation about your pull request, rather than continuing the conversation in the issue.

It's actually possible to turn an issue into a pull request by supplying a branch containing some commits -- it's just not possible via the GitHub UI.
In fact, http://issue2pr.herokuapp.com/ does just that -- fill in a few form fields, click "Transmute!", and you're good to go.

I've been hooked on this tool for a few months now, but the filling-in and clicking was wearing on me.
So I wrote [git-issue2pr](https://github.com/djmitche/git-issue2pr) to do exactly the same thing, but from the command line.
It figures out most of the settings from your git configuration, so transmuting is as simple as `git issue2pr`!
